Methods Lutgen et al. 2026
From: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.ado8005#sec-9
To obtain high quality gametic phase information for a reference haplotype panel, we sequenced 238 individuals using linked-read technology (60). Linked-read sequencing libraries were prepared using Chromium Genome library kits (10X Genomics) (table S1). Short-read sequencing libraries for 139 additional individuals for which fresh material was available were prepared with either the Illumina DNA Prep Kit, the Illumina DNA PCR-free kit, or following Baym et al. (61); sequencing libraries for 12 individuals with degraded DNA were prepared with the xGen ssDNA & Low-Input DNA Library Prep Kit (Integrated DNA Technologies) (table S1). Apart from the seven libraries reported in Lutgen et al. (60) that were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq-X instrument, all libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq6000 instrument with a target coverage of ca. 15x. After the removal of individuals with a coverage below 8x, this resulted in a dataset comprising a total of 379 individuals (tables S1, S13).
Data preparation
To prepare whole-genome resequencing data for analysis, linked-read data and standard short read data were first treated separately, following the GATK 4.1.4.1 (62) best practices pipeline where appropriate. We aligned linked reads to the O. melanoleuca reference genome (63) using phase-aware alignment in Lariat as implemented in LongRanger 2.2.2 align (64). To obtain a SNP exclude set for base quality score recalibration (BQSR), SNPs were then called and genotyped in GATK with HaplotypeCaller as depicted in fig. S22. To include only high-confidence SNPs in the SNP exclude set for BQSR, we retained only SNPs with mapping quality > 40, Fisher strand phred-scaled p-value >60, SNP quality score >20, mapping quality rank sum value > -12.5, read pos rank-sum test value > -8.0 and quality by depth > 5. We retained only biallelic SNPs with at least one homozygous reference and one homozygous alternative genotype or with a minimum of three observations of reference or alternative alleles. BQSR was performed in GATK followed by final SNP calling with HaplotypeCaller. Short reads were adapter-trimmed in fastp 0.20.0 (65) before mapping them to the O. melanoleuca reference genome (63) using bwa-mem 0.7.17 (66). We then marked duplications with PicardTools 2.9.1 (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard) and directly performed BQSR with the SNP exclude set obtained from the geographically and taxonomically representative linked-read data (n=235, table S1). SNPs were called with HaplotypeCaller. To obtain a joint VCF file with unphased SNP data for linked-read and short-read data, we imported the resulting gVCF files into a single genomic database and genotyped SNPs for both data types. The resulting VCF constituted the basis for analyses not requiring gametic phase, such as GWAS.
To infer gametic phase for phase-aware analyses, we leveraged the linked-read information from 235 individuals to establish a high-quality reference haplotype panel (60) with which we then supported the statistical phasing of short-read data. To this end, for each individual we phased heterozygous genotypes obtained in the last step either with (i) linked-read-barcode data using HapCUT2 (67) for individuals with linked reads available or (ii) paired-end information using whatshap v.1.1 (68) for the remaining individuals. To include all originally called SNPs in the individual VCF files, we parsed the phased and unphased data for each individual to reintroduce SNPs homozygous in the individuals. We then parsed individual vcf files into either of two population vcf files, separated by linked-read and short-read data. To establish the final reference haplotype panel, for linked-read data we retained only high-quality SNPs that had a minimum sequencing depth of 5 and minimum genotype quality of 20 in at least 75% of individuals. This left a total of 69,855,099 SNPs (table S13). We then established the gametic phase of phase sets statistically using Shapeit 4.2 (69), assuming that phase sets established beforehand based on linked-read info are correct (–use-PS 0). Finally, we introduced the resulting haplotypes as reference haplotype panel into the statistical phasing of short-read data in Shapeit (–use-PS 0.0001). To avoid biases introduced by population stratification we performed this statistical phasing separately for each of the 11 populations (one cypriaca, four melanoleuca, two pleschanka, two Pontic, and two Caucasus populations) using a specific reference panel consisting of individuals from populations closest related as determined from the PCA (Fig. 1D). Short-read data were not filtered prior to statistical phasing, as with the reference haplotype panel and an average sequencing coverage of 18 × per individual, imputation of missing data are expected to yield adequate genotypes.
For analyses that require an outgroup, we added unphased data from three O. deserti individuals to the phased dataset. For each of the three O. deserti, we generated allsites vcf files in GATK and extracted genotypes for the sites contained in the phased dataset using GATK’s SelectVariants. Using bcftools we then merged the outgroup data with the phase dataset and removed O. deserti-specific indels that contained no data in the phased dataset. To reconstruct the ancestral states of the hispanica complex and the O. deserti outgroup, additional allsites vcf files were generated for two O. monacha and three O. oenanthe serving as distant outgroups.
A characterization of all data sets used for analysis is provided in table S13. Individuals used for specific purposes or analyses are listed in table S14.